1.52.1 - Blog post explaining the fingerprint issue. (#836)
rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org: posts/2021-05-07-caught-red-handed.md

---
layout: post
title: "1.52.0, fingerprints and compiler error forensics"
author: Felix Klock
team: the compiler team <https://www.rust-lang.org/governance/teams/compiler>
---

> The Rust teams are always excited to report on new features offered with each release. Sometimes, however, an important change that is not yet "fully baked" gets accidentally included in a release.

Reviewer: I think it would be really helpful to have a Summary/TL;DR section at the top that says something along the lines of:

- There are bugs in incremental compilation in 1.52.0 stable. 
- Incremental compilation is off by default for release builds, so no production builds should be affected. 
- If you are encountering these bugs during development, you can disable incremental compilation by using the environment variable `CARGO_INCREMENTAL=0` or editing your `$HOME/.cargo/config.toml` or `$HOME/.cargo/config.toml` file to add `build.incremental = 'false'`.
- We're expecting to have a 1.52.1 release on [whatever date]
- We [do|do not] want more bug reports (and if you do want them, what's the most useful information to include)

Reviewer 2: > There are bugs in incremental compilation in 1.52.0 stable.

*and prior versions*

Reviewer 3: > There are bugs in incremental compilation in 1.52.0 stable.

Note that there are bugs in incremental compilation ... in essentially all known versions, in 1.52 they're just very visible. I think we should be very clear that downgrading to 1.51 is likely *not* the path users want to take.

Reviewer: Is "There are bugs in incremental compilation in all Rust stable versions that were made into compilation errors in 1.52.0 stable." more accurate? I just edited my post to that

> There was an instance of this in the most recent release, 1.52.0, which added a new bit of internal-consistency checking, called "incremental compilation hash verification" (abbreviated `verify-ich`). This check is also called an "unstable fingerprint" check, because the diagnostic it currently prints look [like this](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/84336):

Reviewer 4: I think you're missing an "s" here:

```suggestion
There was an instance of this in the most recent release, 1.52.0, which added a new bit of internal-consistency checking, called "incremental compilation hash verification" (abbreviated `verify-ich`). This check is also called an "unstable fingerprint" check, because the diagnostic it currently prints looks [like this](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/84336):
```

```
thread 'rustc' panicked at 'assertion failed: `(left == right)`
  left: `Some(Fingerprint(4565771098143344972, 7869445775526300234))`,
   right: `Some(Fingerprint(14934403843752251060, 623484215826468126))`: found unstable fingerprints for <massive text describing rustc internals elided>

error: internal compiler error: unexpected panic

note: the compiler unexpectedly panicked. this is a bug.
```

> This internal-consistency check, as stated in the diagnostic, yields an "Internal Compiler Error" (or ICE). In other words, it represents a bug in the internals of the Rust compiler itself. In *this* case, though, the ICE is revealing a bug that 1.) is very likely to predate the 1.52.0 release and 2.) could result in miscompilation if it had not been caught by `verify-ich`.

Reviewer 3: @carols10cents It might be helpful to clarify what the distinctions between these things are - the *compiler* itself has no UB, but other than that the miscompilations could include any of these. The known case, for example, caused the wrong pointer to be loaded from a vtable (due to one piece of code expecting one layout for it, and another a different layout, IIRC) and called, leading to memory unsafety (and eventually a crash).

I think we could say more about what we mean by miscompilation but I'd like to better understand what you think the distinctions between these cases are so we can better explain it.

Another recent example looks [like this](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/85039):

```
thread 'rustc' panicked at 'found unstable fingerprints for predicates_of(<massive text describing rustc internals elided>)', /rustc/88f19c6dab716c6281af7602e30f413e809c5974/compiler/rustc_query_system/src/query/plumbing.rs:593:5
```

They all arise from inconsistencies when comparing the incremental-compilation cache stored on disk against the values computed during a current `rustc` invocation, which means they all arise from using incremental compilation.

There are three ways that you may have incremental compilation turned on: You may have set the [environment variable][env-vars] `CARGO_INCREMENTAL=1`, or you may have enabled the `build.incremental` [setting in your Cargo.toml][cargo-toml], or you may be building with the `dev` or `test` [profiles][], which default to having incremental compilation enabled.

[env-vars]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/environment-variables.html#environment-variables-cargo-reads
[cargo-toml]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/config.html#buildincremental

> [profiles]: (https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/profiles.html

Author: omg thank you!

If your project has not opted into enabling incremental compilation, then none of the fingerprint issues should affect your release builds.

## What should a Rust programmer do in response

The Internal Compiler Error asks you to report a bug, and if you can do so, we still want that information. We *want* to know about the cases that are failing.

But regardless of whether or not you file a bug, the problem here can be resolved by either:

 1. deleting your incremental compilation cache (e.g. by running `cargo clean`), or
 2. force incremental compilation to be disabled, by setting `CARGO_INCREMENTAL=0` in your environment or `build.incremental` to `false` in the `config.toml`.

> We recommend that users of 1.52.0 disable incremental compilation, to avoid running into this problem.

Author: Is this language too strong? I'm reflecting on the feedback from @carols10cents [here](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/84970#issuecomment-834771043).

Should we be using the softer language of "We recommend users of 1.52.0 disable incremental compilation *if* they are encountering unstable fingerprints repeatedly" ? We still don't have a good understanding of how often people are running into this, and if they run into it repeatedly even after their first `cargo clean`...

Reviewer: If it would be helpful for folks to provide you with more information about what they're seeing, this would be a great place to give more details on the most helpful information and ways to provide that. I think some folks would be happy to put up with some inconvenience if they can help to identify and fix the problems sooner.

Some folks will definitely just want to get on with their work though, and it sucks that the way to do that will make compile times slower, so I think it's important to acknowledge that. Something like:

```suggestion
To completely avoid running into this problem when using 1.52.0, we recommend disabling incremental compilation via one of the methods described above until we have had a chance to identify and fix the problems and issue a new release. We know this will make compile times slower and we know that's not an ideal workaround, but we are working to make this as temporary a situation as possible.
```

> We do *not* recommend that users of 1.52.0 downgrade to an earlier version of Rust in response to this problem. As noted above, there is at least one instance of a silent [miscompilation][issue-82920] caused by incremental compilation that was not caught until we added the fingerprint checking.

Reviewer: And we don't know how far back these bugs are present.

Author: (I think the text in the summary does a good job of explaining that aspect of things. I don't think we need to reiterate the point here.)

> ## What is the Rust project going to do to fix this

Reviewer: I'm not sure if yinz have had time to do this analysis yet, but I'd love to see some reflection in this section on "how did this get missed in nightly/beta and how would we prevent similar mistakes in the future", or an indication that this analysis will be done and published after the fixes are out.

Reviewer 3: I'll provide some background and maybe you can help indicate which of this is useful/helpful information - it may be published in a retrospective later, but I don't know yet if that'll happen.

On the day of the release I submitted https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/84970 to resolve the question of what to do on 1.53 and 1.54 releases. The verification change landed in 1.52, but I had mistakenly assumed that it had landed in 1.53 and we had an additional 6 weeks to either resolve it or improve our messaging; so, ultimately, the fact that this ICE existed *was* known for 12 weeks now, and indeed a few people have been driving the fixing. I think it was not as well understood how common it was - to my knowledge, we had not received reports until after the stable release of it occurring on *every* build, for example. So it was a priority, but not too strongly so.

Another part of the reason for the lack of prioritization is that this is a longstanding bug - to my knowledge, perhaps even to the initial addition of incremental (at least the red/green system, added a few years back), I don't think I'm aware of work since then that would have caused this. So, while it is true that the ICEs are definitely annoying, they merely reveal underlying problems - and in some sense, are better than nothing. I think everyone is in agreement that they are not the best user experience, and that we should avoid them if at all possible, but I think no one has come up with a straightforward solution to do so. It's possible that an alternative to deploying them would be to disable incremental as a default-on option, and indeed that is under active consideration for next week's point release to mitigate the problem.

In hindsight, it's possible that when we discovered this bug we should have immediately moved to do so. However, disabling such a milestone feature that *does* contribute significant performance improvements to many builds would be a hard sell, especially in light of some builds not triggering the verification panics - and as such being able to compile smoothly, even with the added verification. The tradeoff here is not clear.

I will also share that the release team discussed this last Friday and is expecting to invest in better tooling for tracking bugs (regressions in particular, but more generally too) as they propagate to stable, so that we can have a better awareness and hopefully avoid mistakes of the "woops, I thought this would be in 1.53" variety. This should help with a number of other challenges we've encountered as well. However, I expect this to be a long-term project, not one we can quickly address.

Reviewer 2: > "how did this get missed in nightly/beta and how would we prevent similar mistakes in the future"

There has been bug filing going on basically ever since the ICEs were turned on.

If you check the [list of issues](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+unstable+fingerprints) linked by @Mark-Simulacrum 's issue, you'll see the [oldest](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/83115) [issues](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/83126) having been filed on March 14 to the nightly compiler, with the [PR](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/83007) that enabled the checking having been merged in March 13, so right after that PR merged. With increased exposure to users, the number of reports increased.

But the bugs existed previously too, just caused silent corruptions and weird bugs instead, which is arguably worse than an explicit error message. To the contrary, turning on this error is "making sure the errors won't be missed any more".

Reviewer: Ok, I think the start of a TL;DR on root causes sounds to me like:

- We discovered a silent bug(s) with incremental compilation that have probably existed since incremental compilation was added
- We made the bug into a loud compiler error rather than a silent bug
- While that change was in nightly and beta, we got some bug reports but didn't realize exactly how often this bug would be hit in normal development with stable (most people/projects probably only run night/beta in CI where incremental compilation is either irrelevant or disabled)
- We thought this change was only going into beta this cycle; longer term, we will be looking into tooling improvements to provide more clarity of what version a change is in and possibly how many bugs are being reported about a change as a change switches trains
- It also sounds like we should do some thinking on how to get more user testing of parts of Rust only used during development while they're on nightly and beta?

Please feel free to edit this if I've misunderstood or if you disagree with my conclusions or save this stuff for a retro, but as a Rust user reading this, I mostly want to know that the team is going to take a bigger view of this as well as fixing the immediate issue.

### Short-term plan

Based on the number of bug reports that have already come in, we know we need to do something quickly.

> We are going to be issuing a point release, 1.52.1. The point release will improve the diagnostic output from `verify-ich`, so that a programmer can more effectively act in response to the message (i.e., they will be told that the problem is due to the use of incremental compilation, and that they need to delete their cache, at the very least).

Reviewer: Committing to a date for the point release here, if that's at all possible, would go a long way. Even if you know it won't fix any problems, or will only fix a small number of problems, saying "we'll have a release with whatever fixes we have ready out" for people to try, and at that time saying whether we think there's going to be another point release or not, would make people feel like Something is Being Done.

We might also make incremental compilation opt-in for *all* Cargo [profiles][]; that is, we may turn incremental compilation off for the  `dev` and `test`, so that they match `release` and `bench`, which already have incremental compilation off. (This remains to be decided.)

We do not plan to disable incremental compilation in its entirety. We believe that incremental compilation is providing value for a large number of Rust programmers, and we want to empower them to continue using it, as long as they are equipped with the tools they need to turn it off if they encounter this issue.

### Long-term plan

The long-term plan is to fix the bugs! Incremental compilation is the only realistic way for the Rust compiler to be able to provide a fast edit-compile-run cycle for all of its programmers, and so we need to address [all of the issues][issue-list] that have been identified thus far via `verify-ich`. (There are 32 such issues as of this writing, though many may be duplicates.)

[issue-list]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues?q=is%3Aissue+is%3Aopen+unstable+fingerprints

If you want to come help us do it, we would love for you to [join us][] with the effort!

> [join us]: https://www.rust-lang.org/community

Reviewer: I think a more specific place for people to go who want to help with this specific problem would be better than rust-lang.org/community-- would the T-compiler stream on zulip be appropriate? WG-incr-comp? Maybe have a transient stream just for this issue so that the more general streams can be about other topics?

---
layout: post
title: "Rust 1.52.1"
author: Felix Klock, Mark Rousskov
team: the compiler team <https://www.rust-lang.org/governance/teams/compiler>
release: true
---

The Rust team has prepared a new release, 1.52.1, working around a bug in
incremental compilation which was made into a compiler error in 1.52.0. We
recommend all Rust users, including those currently using stable versions prior
to 1.52.0, upgrade to 1.52.1 or disable incremental compilation. Guidance on how
to do so is available below.

If you have a previous version of Rust installed via rustup, getting Rust
1.52.1 is as easy as:

```console
rustup update stable
```

If you don't have it already, you can [get `rustup`][install]
from the appropriate page on our website.

[install]: https://www.rust-lang.org/install.html

# Summary

This release works around broken builds on 1.52.0, which are caused by newly
added verification. The bugs this verification detects are present in all Rust
versions, and can trigger miscompilations in incremental builds, so downgrading
to a prior stable version is not a fix.

Users are encouraged to upgrade to 1.52.1 or disable incremental in their local

> environment if on a prior versions: please see the [what you should do][part3]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
environment if on a prior version: please see the [what you should do][part3]
```

 1. Explain [what the errors look like][part0],
 1. Explain [what the check does][part1], at a high level,
 2. Explain [how the check is presenting itself][part2] in the Rust 1.52.0 release,
 3. Tell you [what you should do][part3] if you see an unstable fingerprint on your project,
 4. Describe our plans for [how the Rust project will address][part4] the problems discussed here.

[part0]: #what-does-the-error-look-like
[part1]: #what-are-fingerprints-why-are-we-checking-them
[part2]: #how-does-this-show-up
[part3]: #what-should-a-rust-programmer-do-in-response
[part4]: #what-is-the-rust-project-going-to-do-to-fix-this

## What does the error look like?

The error message looks something like this, with the key piece being the "found
unstable fingerprints" text.

```
thread 'rustc' panicked at 'assertion failed: `(left == right)`
  left: `Some(Fingerprint(4565771098143344972, 7869445775526300234))`,
  right: `Some(Fingerprint(14934403843752251060, 623484215826468126))`: found unstable fingerprints for <massive text describing rustc internals elided>

error: internal compiler error: unexpected panic

note: the compiler unexpectedly panicked. this is a bug.
```

> This is the error caused by the internal consistency check, and as stated in the diagnostic, it yields an "Internal Compiler Error" (or ICE). In other words, it represents a bug in the internals of the Rust compiler itself. In *this* case, the ICE is revealing a bug that predates the 1.52.0 release and could result in miscompilation if it had not been caught by `verify-ich`.

Reviewer: I don't think it hurts to stress repeatedly that this is a bug in *incremental compilation*, not *all* compilation:

```suggestion
This is the error caused by the internal consistency check, and as stated in the diagnostic, it yields an "Internal Compiler Error" (or ICE). In other words, it represents a bug in the internals of the Rust compiler itself. In *this* case, the ICE is revealing a bug in incremental compilation that predates the 1.52.0 release and could result in miscompilation if it had not been caught by `verify-ich`.
```

2. You may have set the [environment variable][env-vars] `CARGO_INCREMENTAL=1`
3. You may have enabled the `build.incremental` [setting in your Cargo config][cargo-config]
4. You may have enabled the `incremental` [setting in your Cargo.toml][cargo-toml] for a given profile

[env-vars]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/environment-variables.html#environment-variables-cargo-reads
[cargo-config]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/config.html#buildincremental
[cargo-toml]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/profiles.html#incremental
[profiles]: https://doc.rust-lang.org/cargo/reference/profiles.html

If your project has not adjusted the defaults, then when running `cargo build
--release` or otherwise in the `release` profile configuration incremental is
disabled on all Rust versions[^1], and these issues should not affect your release
builds.

## What should a Rust programmer do in response

The Internal Compiler Error asks you to report a bug, and if you can do so, we still want that information. We *want* to know about the cases that are failing.

> But regardless of whether or not you file a bug, the problem here can be resolved by either:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
But regardless of whether or not you file a bug, the problem can be worked around on your end by either:
```

 1. upgrading to 1.52.1, if you have not yet done so (which will disable
    incremental for you).
 2. deleting your incremental compilation cache (e.g. by running `cargo clean`), or

>  3. force incremental compilation to be disabled, by setting `CARGO_INCREMENTAL=0` in your environment or `build.incremental` to `false` in the `config.toml`.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
 3. forcing incremental compilation to be disabled, by setting `CARGO_INCREMENTAL=0` in your environment or `build.incremental` to `false` in the `config.toml`.
```

upgrading, deleting, forcing :)

We recommend that users of 1.52.0 upgrade to 1.52.1, which disables incremental
compilation.

We do *not* recommend that users of 1.52.0 downgrade to an earlier version of Rust in response to this problem. As noted above, there is at least one instance of a silent [miscompilation][issue-82920] caused by incremental compilation that was not caught until we added the fingerprint checking.

If a user is willing to deal with the incremental verification ICE's, and wishes

> to opt back into the 1.52.0 behavior, they may set `RUSTC_FORCE_INCREMENTAL` to

Reviewer 5: For these users who are willing to put up with some ICEs, would it make sense to ask them to install the 1.53 beta? We have fixed a number in beta although not all of them.

Author: (The text a few paragraphs down does suggest that option, of trying out the 1.53 beta since a number of bugs are fixed there.)

acknowledge that the workarounds presented here and recommendations are painful,
and will be working hard to ensure the situation is as temporary as possible.

## What is the Rust project going to do to fix this

### Short-term plan

We have issued 1.52.1 today which:

* Disables incremental compilation in the Rust compiler (unless asked for by a
  new environment variable, `RUSTC_FORCE_INCREMENTAL=1`).
* Improves diagnostic output for the new verification if incremental compilation is enabled,
  indicating how to work around the bugs by purging incremental state or
  disabling incremental.

This is intended to be a mitigation that helps the majority of Rust users have
an upgrade path to a safe Rust compiler which does not have the risk of
miscompiling their code, but also provide the option for users willing to deal
with the errors to do so.

We expect to continue to actively invest in fixing the bugs, and depending on
our confidence in the fixes, may issue a 1.52.2 point release which backports
those fixes to the stable channel. Users wishing to help us test can use the
nightly channel, and report bugs to rust-lang/rust with any ICEs they are

> seeing. We do not expect at this time to disable incremental by default on the

Reviewer 5: I think this raises the question "will incremental be disabled on beta?"

It might be good to preemptively address that question.

---
layout: post
title: "Announcing Rust 1.52.1"
author: Felix Klock, Mark Rousskov

> team: the compiler team <https://www.rust-lang.org/governance/teams/compiler>

Reviewer 6: Should this be the release team as this is a release?

[pr-45867]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/45867
[issue-82920]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/82920
[pr-83007]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/pull/83007

When we first turned on the fingerprint checks by default, there was a steady
stream of issues filed by users of the nightly (and beta) toolchains, and steady
progress has been made on identifying fixes, a number of which have already
landed.

In the past week, we had started [making plans][issue-84970] to improve the
user-experience, so that the diagnostic issued by the check would do a better
job of telling the programmer what to do in response. Unfortunately, this was
done under the assumption that the new verification would ship in 1.53, not
1.52.

[issue-84970]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/84970

It turns out `verify-ich` was turned on in version 1.52.0, which was [released recently][].

[released recently]: /2021/05/06/Rust-1.52.0.html

> This release, 1.52.1, works around the breakage caused by the newly added

Author: (This change is to emphasize that the the subject of the sentence is *not* version 1.52.0, which was referenced in the previous sentence.)

---
layout: post
title: "Rust 1.52.1"
author: Felix Klock, Mark Rousskov
team: the compiler team <https://www.rust-lang.org/governance/teams/compiler>
release: true
---

The Rust team has prepared a new release, 1.52.1, working around a bug

> introduced in 1.52.0. We recommend all Rust users, including those currently

Reviewer: From what I understand of previous comments yinz have made, the bug(s) weren't *introduced* in 1.52.0 so much as *surfaced* or *made into a compiler error*. I'd also mention incremental compilation in the first sentence. So perhaps something like:

> The Rust team has prepared a new release, 1.52.1, working around a bug in incremental compilation that was made into a compiler error in 1.52.0.

> using stable versions prior to 1.52.0 upgrade to 1.52.1.

Reviewer: This sentence needs another comma to end the appositive phrase:

> We recommend all Rust users, including those currently using stable versions prior to 1.52.0, upgrade to 1.52.1.

If you have a previous version of Rust installed via rustup, getting Rust
1.52.1 is as easy as:

```console
rustup update stable
```

If you don't have it already, you can [get `rustup`][install]
from the appropriate page on our website.

[install]: https://www.rust-lang.org/install.html

# What's in 1.52.1 stable

This point release contains a single change: it disables incremental

> compilation. Read on for more details as to why, and the next steps the Rust

Reviewer: I would say "disables incremental compilation by default" here.

[install]: https://www.rust-lang.org/install.html

# Summary

This release works around broken builds on 1.52.0, which are caused by newly
added verification. The bugs this verification detects are present in all Rust

> versions, and can trigger miscompilations in incremental builds, so downgrading

Reviewer: I would say "all Rust versions since 1.24.0, when incremental compilation was turned on by default", according to here: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/master/RELEASES.md#cargo-27, I can't find quickly where incremental compilation was first shipped in stable. Effectively, this is "all Rust versions" because people usually upgrade, but I think it helps to be more specific if we can.

Reviewer 3: Rust 1.24 is correct - I'm going to add this as a footnote, so we're not distracting too much from the central message. It was all the way back in February 2018, so my guess is most users have migrated.

to a prior stable version is not a fix.

Users are encouraged to upgrade to 1.52.1 or disable incremental in their local
environment if on a prior versions: please see the [what you should do][part3]
section for details on how to do so.

Incremental compilation is off by default for release builds, so few
production builds should be affected (only users who may have opted in).

This post is going to:

 1. Explain [what the errors look like][part0],
 1. Explain [what the check does][part1], at a high level,
 2. Explain [how the check is presenting itself][part2] in the Rust 1.52.0 release,
 3. Tell you [what you should do][part3] if you see an unstable fingerprint on your project,
 4. Describe our plans for [how the Rust project will address][part4] the problems discussed here.

[part0]: #what-does-the-error-look-like
[part1]: #what-are-fingerprints-why-are-we-checking-them
[part2]: #how-does-this-show-up
[part3]: #what-should-a-rust-programmer-do-in-response
[part4]: #what-is-the-rust-project-going-to-do-to-fix-this

## What does the error look like?

> The error message looks something like this, with the key piece being the "found

Reviewer: 👍🏻 👍🏻 👍🏻 👍🏻

Another recent example looks [like this](https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/issues/85039):

```
thread 'rustc' panicked at 'found unstable fingerprints for predicates_of(<massive text describing rustc internals elided>)', /rustc/.../compiler/rustc_query_system/src/query/plumbing.rs:593:5
```

They all arise from inconsistencies when comparing the incremental-compilation cache stored on disk against the values computed during a current `rustc` invocation, which means they all arise from using incremental compilation.

There are several ways that you may have incremental compilation turned on:

1. You may be building with the `dev` or `test` [profiles][] which default to having incremental compilation enabled.
2. You may have set the [environment variable][env-vars] `CARGO_INCREMENTAL=1`
3. You may have enabled the `build.incremental` [setting in your Cargo config][cargo-config]

> 4. You may have enabled the `incremental` [setting in your Cargo.toml][cargo-toml] for a given profile

Reviewer: 👍🏻 👍🏻 👍🏻 👍🏻

Author: mm, good catch; i hadn't thought of the scenario of adjusting the settings for individual profiles in a local manner.
